In Django, makemigrations and migrate commands are used to manage database schema changes and apply them to the database. Here's when you should use each command:

makemigrations Command:
The makemigrations command is used to create new database migration files based on the changes you have made to your models. You should use this command when:

Defining or modifying models: When you add, remove, or modify models in your Django app's models.py file, you need to create migration files to reflect these changes in the database schema.

Changing model fields or options: When you change field types, add constraints, or modify other options of existing model fields, Django detects these changes and generates migration files to apply these changes to the database schema.

migrate Command:
The migrate command is used to apply database migrations to the database and synchronize the database schema with the current state of your models. You should use this command when:

Applying migrations: After creating migration files using makemigrations, you need to apply these migrations to the database to update the schema accordingly.

Setting up a new database: When setting up a new database for your Django project, you need to run migrate to create the database schema based on the initial state of your models.

Updating existing database: When deploying changes to an existing Django project, you should run migrate to apply any new migrations and update the database schema to match the current state of your models.

Summary:
Use makemigrations to create migration files based on model changes.
Use migrate to apply migrations and synchronize the database schema with the current state of your models.
In most cases, you'll run makemigrations whenever you make changes to your models, and then run migrate to apply those changes to the database. It's a good practice to run makemigrations followed by migrate whenever you deploy changes to your Django project to ensure that the database schema is up-to-date.